Title: How I made this site
Date: 2021-03-15
Category: meta
Summary: First post on site, about making the site, while I'm building the site. So meta.
Tags: pelican, python

# How I made this site

I chose to use [pelican](https://getpelican.org/) for a few reasons:

* This site is hosted for free on GitHub and that means it needs to be statically generated. 
* Pelican is written in python and I'm a python fanboy.
* Pelican is still in active development based on the merges, issues, and discussion on its repo in GitHub.
* Pelican has all the features I need plus I can supplement with other things like [invoke](http://www.pyinvoke.org/) (which I just learned about and am excited to try).

In the final structure, I will have one repo for the pelican install (*thebouv-pelican.git*) which will have settings, pelican files, raw assets like a post's markdown files and images. And one for the static site files (*thebouv.github.io.git*) because GitHub only serves from root or /docs. I feel this way is cleaner and allows the I will be automating publishing with **invoke**.

I am basing this process off of [this tutorial](https://randlow.github.io/posts/python/create-pelican-blog/) but with some of my own ideas and organizational changes. Definitely fewer dependencies as I have no need for Jupyter Notebooks on this site, nor for now do I think I need typogrify or beautifulsoup as per that tutorial. I'll also be looking at the [pelican quickstart](https://docs.getpelican.com/en/latest/install.html) and other pelican docs to make decisions as I go.

## Setting Up

First I cleared all previous content out of my previous static site and leave only the README.md and CNAME files. The README will get updated during the project and CNAME is a text file required by GitHub to have thebouv.com as a custom domain.  I could have set up a totally new repo or trashed this one and restarted, but with git I don't need to and I can always roll back one day or refer to the old site if I need.

### Some git stuff

I create my empty repo for *thebouv-pelican* and set it up in GitHub as a remote:

    mkdir thebouv-pelican
    cd thebouv-pelican
    git init
    gh repo create

Notice the *gh* command. If you don't use the GitHub command line tool *gh* yet I do recommend it. It is pretty handy.

### Pelican!

Now to set up my python environment and start getting Pelican set up.  I'm doing this all with python 3.9.1 because it is stable and the most recent 3.9 release that pyenv has.

    python -m venv .venv
    source .venv/bin/activate
    pip install "pelican[markdown]" invoke
    pip freeze > requirements.txt

Now for the remainder of this post I'm going to no longer talk about being in a venv, activating, deactivating, etc. If I'm in a python project, I've got the venv activated. I assume the reader is managing this aspect.

I'm going to run the *pelican_quickstart* command line app and answer all the questions it poses. I'm filling out my site's details and pretty much accepting the defaults to things with defaults. **Except** I am not answering yes to creaking a tasks.py and Makefile. Cause I don't want a Makefile with its own syntax when I can use **invoke** to do all the same things to help me publish.

I'm also manually creating a pages folder under the content folder generated by *pelican_quickstart* because I will want some stand-alone non-blog pages in the future like a resume.

    pelican_quickstart
    mkdir content/pages

This leaves me with this structure below:

    thebouv-pelican/
    ├── content
    │   └── pages
    ├── output
    ├── pelicanconf.py       # Main settings file
    ├── publishconf.py       # Settings to use when ready to publish
    └── requirements.txt     # saved earlier from pip freeze

Now that those exist and I want to start adding content, I want to do one thing real quick. I want to make my output directory actually be a git submodule of *thebouv.github.io.git* since the generated output will be in that repo.

    git submodule add -f https://github.com/thebouv/thebouv.github.io output

Later I will automate commiting and pushing both this repo and the generated content up to GitHub with *invoke*.

### Theme

For now I plan to use the Pelican theme called [pelican-clean-blog](https://github.com/gilsondev/pelican-clean-blog) but fork it to my own version as [pelican-clean](https://github.com/thebouv/pelican-clean):

    git submodule add -f git@github.com:thebouv/pelican-clean.git themes/pelican-clean

### Let's fire this baby up!

This article, the one I'm writing and you're reading, is the first post in my blog. So the instructions below are so I can test this out locally and see it for the first time in all its orange glory:

    pelican content



